



Network Working Group                                         J. Jimenez
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Intended status: Informational                            April 06, 2016
Expires: October 8, 2016


 Report from the IAB Workshop on IoT Semantic Interoperability (IOTSI)
                           draft-iotsi-iab-00

Abstract

   This document provides a summary of the IAB Workshop on IoT Semantic
   Interoperability (IOTSI), which took place in Santa Clara, CA, on
   March 17-18, 2016.  The main goal of the workshop was to foster a
   discussion on the different Semantics used by multiple organizations
   to define IoT information.  This report summarizes the discussions
   and lists recommendations to the Internet Engineering Task Force
   (IETF) community.  The views and positions in this report are those
   of the workshop participants and do not necessarily reflect the views
   and positions of the authors, the Internet Architecture Board (IAB).

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on October 8, 2016.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2016 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Architecture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Translation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Appendix A: Program Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Appendix B: Workshop Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Appendix C: Accepted Position Papers  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  Appendix D: List of Participants  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.1.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     9.2.  URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) holds occasional workshops
   designed to consider long-term issues and strategies for the
   Internet, and to suggest future directions for the Internet
   architecture.  Some of those workshops required some cooperation
   effort between organizations.  One of the target of the workshops is
   to bridge those organizations, specially when the topics are out of
   the scope for the IETF.  This long-term planning function of the IAB
   is complementary to the ongoing engineering efforts performed by
   working groups of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), under
   the leadership of the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) and
   area directorates.

   In the Internet of Things (IoT) area there has been significant
   improvements on the problem of interoperability in recent years.  The
   transition from IPv4 to IPv6 increases the increases address space
   required in the IoT context, similarly at the application layer there
   seems to be some consolidation around few protocols that follow
   either a REST (e.g.  CoAP, HTTP) or Publish/Subscribe type of
   architecture (e.g.  MQTT).  At the application layer such degree of
   interoperability has not yet happened.  The work on data formats (in
   the form of data models, information models and interaction models)
   has not seen the same level of consistency throughout various
   standardization groups.






Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


   Thus, the IOTSI Workshop was organized in order to find commonalities
   between the different models proposed by various organizations,
   industries and academia.  Few of the identified topics where:

   o  The different perceived state of the art on data and information
      models.

   o  The lack of an encoding-independent standardization of the
      information, the so-called information model.

   o  The strong relationship with the underlying communication
      architecture, such as an RPC, publish/Subscribe or RESTful
      designs.

   o  Identifying which similar concepts groups have develop in
      parallel, specially those that would require only slight
      modifications to solve interoperability.

   o  Identifying how existing data models can be mapped against each
      other to offer inter working.

   o  Identifying common use cases for cooperation and harmonization.

   It was left out of the scope of this workshop to impose specific
   frameworks/solutions to the attendees, transport security and
   L1/L2/L3/L4 protocol discussion.

2.  Terminology

   The first roadblock to semantic interoperability is the lack of a
   common vocabulary to start the discussion.  There is a need to align
   between participating organizations on a common set of basic terms.
   [RFC3444] does a start by separating conceptual models for designers
   or Information Models (IMs) and concrete detailed models for
   implementors or Data Models (DMs).  There are concepts that are
   undefined in that RFC and elsewhere, such as the interaction with the
   resources of an endpoint or Interaction Model.  Therefore the three
   "main" common models that could be identified were:

   Information Model (IM)  it defines an environment at the highest
      level of abstraction, they express the desired functionality.
      They can be defined informally (e.g. in plain English) or more
      formally (e.g.  UML, Entity-Relationship Diagrams, etc.).
      Implementation details are hidden.

   Data Model (DM)  it defines concrete data representations at a lower
      level of abstraction, including implementation and protocol-
      specific details.  Some examples are: SNMP Management Information



Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


      Base (MIBs), W3C Thing Description (TD) Things, YANG models, LWM2M
      Schemas, OCF Schemas and so on.

   Interaction Model (IN)  it defines how data is accessed and retrieved
      from the endpoints, thus the design pattern that the system has
      (e.g.  REST APIs, Publish/Subscribe operations, RPC-calls...).

   Another identified issue was that some IoT terminology is overloaded
   with meaning.  That meaning will vary depending on the context they
   are used on (i.e. semantics, models, encoding, serialization format,
   media types, encoding types...).  Due to time constraints no concrete
   terminology was agreed upon, however work will continue within each
   organization to create various terminology documents (see IOTSI
   Repository [1])

3.  Architecture

   Architectures follow different design patterns, some are REST-
   oriented with clear methods to find and manipulate resources on
   endpoints with almost no state kept between them.  Others are more
   Publish/Subscribe-oriented that focus on the flow of information
   based on the topics of the information being shared.  Others are RPC-
   like requiring to know beforehand the set of parameters that are
   accessed, they require to generate code both on the client and server
   side, they are tightly coupled and service-oriented.

   Thing-hub-cloud -things talk to a hub, which talks back to them and
   to the cloud.  There's a spectrum of emphasis on the hub vs. the
   cloud.  In some the hub is simply an access point; in others it's a
   critical place for control loops and ALGs.  Meta Thing-some things
   are actually virtual, like an alarm composed of clock, lights, and
   thermostat.  Nearby things-some things may be geospatially related
   even if they are not on the same network or within the same
   administrative domain.

   Current data models and definitions for "things" often focus on
   defining actual physical devices and representing their state.  That
   focus should perhaps be shifted into a more holistic or user-oriented
   perspective, defining abstract concepts as well.  On the other a lot
   of focus is placed on human interaction with physical devices while
   IoT will be more oriented to interaction between "things" instead.
   Those things should be designed to be multiple-purpose, keeping in
   mind that solutions should be open-ended to facilitate new usages and
   new future domains of operation. this pattern has already happened,
   devices that were intended for one purpose end up being used for a
   different one given the right context ((e.g. smart phone led light
   turned out to be a heartrate monitor).  IoT domain is currently
   missing insights into what user actually expect.



Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


4.  Translation

   One of the targets of interoperability is to create translators
   between the data models.  There are analogies with gateways back in
   1985 when they were used to translate between network protocols,
   eventually IP took over providing interoperability, however we lost
   some of the features provided by those other protocols.  The creation
   of an equivalent "hub/s" that offer translation between the different
   data models or data semantics seems one of the ways forward.  Some
   lose of expressiveness due to the translation between models seems
   also unavoidable.

   When it comes to translation two different distinctions appear:
   translating data between data models and translating data models.
   The first one implies doing the translation at runtime while the
   second performs one translation between the data models one time,
   like translating a YANG model to a RAML/JSON one.  Indeed, for every
   IM multiple DMs could be translated.

   In a sense these distinctions affect as to when the translation is
   performed.  It can be done at "design time" when the information
   model is done, it can be done at runtime for a concrete data model
   and it can be done depending n the actual serialization.

   Yet another distinction will appear depending on the requirements
   from the application protocols, RPC-style ones might require a
   slightly different DM than REST ones for similar operations, for
   example SNMP-traps could be similar to CoAP-Observations but not
   quite the same.  It is easier to translate between systems that
   follow the same architecture/design pattern than across
   architectures, full translation might not even be possible (e.g.
   stateless vs statefull systems).

   The first example (Figure 1) shows a GET request that is split into
   three blocks.  The server proposes a block size of 128, and the
   client agrees.  The first two ACKs contain 128 bytes of payload each,
   and third ACK contains between 1 and 128 bytes.














Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


   CLIENT                                                     SERVER
     |                                                            |
     | CON [MID=1234], GET, /status                       ------> |
     |                                                            |
     | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.05 Content, 2/0/1/128          |
     |                                                            |
     | CON [MID=1235], GET, /status, 2/1/0/128            ------> |
     |                                                            |
     | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.05 Content, 2/1/1/128          |
     |                                                            |
     | CON [MID=1236], GET, /status, 2/2/0/128            ------> |
     |                                                            |
     | <------   ACK [MID=1236], 2.05 Content, 2/2/0/128          |

                      Figure 1: Simple blockwise GET

5.  Appendix A: Program Committee

   This workshop is organized by Jari Arkko, Ralph Droms, Jaime Jimenez,
   Michael Koster, Dave Thaler and Hannes Tschofenig.

6.  Appendix B: Workshop Material

   Main Workshop Page and position papers  https://www.iab.org/activitie
      s/workshops/iotsi/

   Agenda and Slides  https://www.iab.org/activities/workshops/iotsi/
      agenda/

   Collaborative Github Repository  https://github.com/iotsi

7.  Appendix C: Accepted Position Papers

   1.   Jari Arkko, "Gadgets and Protocols Come and Go, Data Is Forever"

   2.   Carsten Bormann, "Noise in specifications hurts"

   3.   Benoit Claise, "YANG as the Data Modelling Language in the IoT
        space"

   4.   Robert Cragie, "The ZigBee Cluster Library over IP"

   5.   Dee Denteneer, Michael Verschoor, Teresa Zotti, "Fairhair:
        interoperable IoT services for major Building Automation and
        Lighting Control ecosystems"

   6.   Universal Devices, "Object Oriented Approach to IoT
        Interoperability"



Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


   7.   Bryant Eastham, "Interoperability and the OpenDOF Project"

   8.   Stephen Farrell, Alissa Cooper, "It's Often True: Security's
        Ignored (IOTSI) - and Privacy too"

   9.   Christian Groves, Lui Yan, ang Weiwei, "Overview of IoT
        semantics landscape"

   10.  Ted Hardie, "Loci of Interoperability for the Internet of
        Things"

   11.  Russ Housley, "Vehicle-to-Vehicle and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
        Communications"

   12.  Jaime Jimenez, Michael Koster, Hannes Tschofenig, "IPSO Smart
        Objects"

   13.  David Jones, IOTDB - "Interoperability Through Semantic
        Metastandards"

   14.  Sebastian Kaebisch, Darko Anicic, "Thing Description as Enabler
        of Semantic Interoperability on the Web of Things"

   15.  Achilleas Kemos, "Alliance for Internet of Things Innovation
        Semantic Interoperability Release 2.0, AIOTI WG03 - IoT
        Standardisation"

   16.  Ari Keraenen, Cullen Jennings, "SenML: simple building block for
        IoT semantic interoperability"

   17.  Dongmyoung Kim, Yunchul Choi, Yonggeun Hong, "Research on
        Unified Data Model and Framework to Support Interoperability
        between IoT Applications"

   18.  Michael Koster, "Model-Based Hypertext Language"

   19.  Matthias Kovatsch, Yassin N.  Hassan, Klaus Hartke, "Semantic
        Interoperability Requires Self-describing Interaction Models"

   20.  Kai Kreuzer, "A Pragmatic Approach to Interoperability in the
        Internet of Things"

   21.  Barry Leiba, "Position Paper"

   22.  Marcello Lioy, "AllJoyn"

   23.  Kerry Lynn, Laird Dornin, "Modeling RESTful APIs with JSON
        Hyper-Schema"



Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


   24.  Erik Nordmark, "Thoughts on IoT Semantic Interoperability: Scope
        of security issues"

   25.  Open Geospatial Consortium, "OGC SensorThings API: Communicating
        "Where" in the Web of Things"

   26.  Jean Paoli, Taqi Jaffri, "IoT Information Model
        Interoperability: An Open, Crowd-Sourced Approach in Three
        Parallel Parti"

   27.  Joaquin Prado, "OMA Lightweight M2M Resource Model"

   28.  Dave Raggett, Soumya Kanti Datta, "Input paper for IAB Semantic
        Interoperability Workshop"

   29.  Pete Rai, Stephen Tallamy, "Semantic Overlays Over Immutable
        Data to Facilitate Time and Context Specific Interoperability"

   30.  Jasper Roes, Laura Daniele, "Towards semantic interoperability
        in the IoT using the Smart Appliances REFerence ontology (SAREF)
        and its extensions"

   31.  Max Senges, "Submission for IAB IoT Sematic Interoperability
        workshop"

   32.  Bill Silverajan, Mert Ocak, Jaime Jimenez, "Implementation
        Experiences of Semantic Interoperability for RESTful Gateway
        Management"

   33.  Ned Smith, Jeff Sedayao, Claire Vishik, "Key Semantic
        Interoperability Gaps in the Internet-of-Things Meta-Models"

   34.  Robert Sparks and Ben Campbell, "Considerations for certain IoT
        based services"

   35.  J.  Clarke Stevens, "Open Connectivity Foundation oneIoTa Tool"

   36.  J.  Clarke Stevens, Piper Merriam, "Derived Models for
        Interoperability Between IoT Ecosystems"

   37.  Ravi Subramaniam, "Semantic Interoperability in Open
        Connectivity Foundation (OCF) - formerly Open Interconnect
        Consortium (OIC)""

   38.  Andrew Sullivan, "Position paper for IOTSI workshop"

   39.  Darshak Thakore, "IoT Security in the context of Semantic
        Interoperability"



Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


   40.  Dave Thaler, "IoT Bridge Taxonomy"

   41.  Dave Thaler, S"ummary of AllSeen Alliance Work Relevant to
        Semantic Interoperability"

   42.  Mark Underwood, Michael Gruninger, Leo Obrst, Ken Baclawski,
        Mike Bennett, Gary Berg-Cross, Torsten Hahmann, Ram Sriram,
        "Internet of Things: Toward Smart Networked Systems and
        Societies"

   43.  Peter van der Stok, Andy Bierman, "YANG-Based Constrained
        Management Interface (CoMI)"

8.  Appendix D: List of Participants

   o  Andy Bierman, YumaWorks

   o  Carsten Bormann, Uni Bremen/TZI

   o  Ben Campbell, Oracle

   o  Benoit Claise, Cisco

   o  Alissa Cooper, Cisco

   o  Robert Cragie, ARM

   o  Laura Daniele, TNO

   o  Bryant Eastham, OpenDof

   o  Christian Groves, Huawei

   o  Ted Hardie, Google

   o  Yonggeun Hong, ETRI

   o  Russ Housley, Vigil Security

   o  David Janes, IOTDB

   o  Jaime Jimenez, Ericsson

   o  Shailendra Karody, Catalina Labs

   o  Ari Keraenen, Ericsson

   o  Michael Koster, SmartThings



Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


   o  Matthias Kovatsch, Siemens

   o  Kai Kreuzer, Deutsche Telekom

   o  Barry Leiba, Huawei

   o  Steve Liang, Uni Calgary

   o  Marcello Lioy, Qualcomm

   o  Kerry Lynn, Verizon

   o  Mayan Mathen, Catalina Labs

   o  Erik Nordmenk, Arista

   o  Jean Paoli, Microsoft

   o  Joaquin Prado, OMA

   o  Dave Raggett, W3C

   o  Max Senges, Google

   o  Ned Smith, Intel

   o  Robert Sparks, Oracle

   o  Ram Sriram, Nist

   o  Clarke Stevens

   o  Ram Subramanian, Intel

   o  Andrew Sullivan, DIN

   o  Darshak Thakore, Cablelabs

   o  Dave Thaler, Microsoft

   o  Michael Verschoor, Philips Lightning

9.  References








Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                    IOTSI                       April 2016


9.1.  Informative References

   [RFC3444]  Pras, A. and J. Schoenwaelder, "On the Difference between
              Information Models and Data Models", RFC 3444, DOI
              10.17487/RFC3444, January 2003,
              <http://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3444>.

9.2.  URIs

   [1] https://github.com/iotsi

Author's Address

   Jaime Jimenez
   Ericsson

   Email: jaime.jimenez@ericsson.com


































Jimenez                  Expires October 8, 2016               [Page 11]
